---
title: Interpreting the Khipu
---

Analysis of the khipu at UCSB identified **97 pendant cords** and **37 subsidiary cords** in **nine clusters**. These nine clusters of cords likely recorded census and tribute information related to different communities, which is suggested by the patterning on the cords within each cluster.

Looking closely, some of the clusters contain many knots and knot types, while the cords in other clusters have fewer knots, or none at all. This speaks to the continual use and re-use of khipu to record and update information.

Taking a closer look at Cluster 10, we can see that pendant cords within a cluster tend to share characteristics. These 8 pendant cords are all the same shade of dark brown with similar knot construction; their knots are all tied 10 to 12.3 cm from their respective attachments to the primary cord, and their knot values range from 1 to 4. Both of these ranges are small relative to the wider set of ranges within the rest of the khipu. While there are slight differences from cord to cord, these cords are more similar to each other than they are to cords of other clusters, and the same can be said of every cluster on the khipu. Some clusters are more uniform than others, but all clusters are made up of generally similar cords.

Given its physical complexity, creating a 3D model of this khipu was a process of trial and error. The goal was to preserve as much knot and cord detail as possible, but conventional 3D scanners initially had trouble capturing that much detail on such a small scale. Our scanner had trouble differentiating between the khipu and the board it is mounted on. Essentially, the scanner thinks of the khipu and the board as one object. With other objects, we could flip the object to scan the backside and then merge the models, but because the khipu is mounted to the board, this is not possible here. This means that we can capture a high-quality scan of the exposed side of the khipu, but not the side facing the board.

The scanning process itself was long and required numerous passes over the khipu due to the dense clustering of cords. One cord is packed with topographical information, which the scanner detects. The twists and turns of the spun cords and complex knots create innumerable peaks and valleys for the scanner to process. When these cords are viewed together, the amount of information that the scanner has to work with is enormous.

<div class="sketchfab-embed-wrapper"> <iframe title="Khipu 1960.79 (cleaned)" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true" allow="autoplay; fullscreen; xr-spatial-tracking" xr-spatial-tracking execution-while-out-of-viewport execution-while-not-rendered web-share src="https://sketchfab.com/models/ebd5572964da4083909dfda31fcac062/embed"> </iframe> <p style="font-size: 13px; font-weight: normal; margin: 5px; color: #4A4A4A;"> <a href="https://sketchfab.com/3d-models/khipu-196079-cleaned-ebd5572964da4083909dfda31fcac062?utm_medium=embed&utm_campaign=share-popup&utm_content=ebd5572964da4083909dfda31fcac062" target="_blank" rel="nofollow" style="font-weight: bold; color: #1CAAD9;"> Khipu 1960.79 (cleaned) </a> by <a href="https://sketchfab.com/ucsb-mirl?utm_medium=embed&utm_campaign=share-popup&utm_content=ebd5572964da4083909dfda31fcac062" target="_blank" rel="nofollow" style="font-weight: bold; color: #1CAAD9;"> Material / Image Research Lab, UCSB </a> on <a href="https://sketchfab.com?utm_medium=embed&utm_campaign=share-popup&utm_content=ebd5572964da4083909dfda31fcac062" target="_blank" rel="nofollow" style="font-weight: bold; color: #1CAAD9;">Sketchfab</a></p></div>
*We recommend viewing the 3D model fullscreen.*